1. Fundamentals & Core Concepts

Basic Kotlin Concepts

1) What is Kotlin?
Kotlin is a modern, statically typed programming language that runs on the JVM and is officially supported by Google for Android development. It is concise, safe, and fully interoperable with Java.

2) Who developed Kotlin?
Kotlin was developed by JetBrains, the company behind IntelliJ IDEA and Android Studio.

3) What are the key advantages and features of Kotlin compared to Java?
Concise code (less boilerplate)
Null safety (reduces NullPointerException)
Full Java interoperability
Smart casts
Extension functions
Data classes
Coroutines for asynchronous programming
Improved readability and maintainability

4) What is the difference between Java and Kotlin?
Feature	Java	Kotlin
Null Safety	No	Yes
Boilerplate Code	More	Less
Data Classes	Manual	Built-in
Coroutines	Not native	Built-in
Extension Functions	No	Yes
Checked Exceptions	Yes	No
Functional Support	Limited	Strong

5) What is Kotlin's primary target platform?
Kotlin’s primary target platform is the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), but it also supports:
Android
Kotlin/JS (JavaScript)
Kotlin/Native (iOS, desktop, embedded)

6) How does Kotlin-Java interoperability work?
Kotlin can call Java code directly
Java can call Kotlin code
Kotlin compiles to JVM bytecode
Existing Java libraries and frameworks work seamlessly in Kotlin
No need to rewrite Java code when migrating

7) What programming paradigms does Kotlin support?
Kotlin supports:
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
Functional Programming
Procedural Programming
Declarative style (especially with Jetpack Compose)

8) What serves as the entry point for a Kotlin program?
The entry point is the main() function:
fun main() {
    println("Hello, Kotlin")
}

9) What are some basic syntax rules in Kotlin?
Semicolons are optional
fun keyword is used for functions
val for immutable variables, var for mutable
Type inference is supported
Classes are declared using class
String templates use $variable
Example:
val name = "Shreyas"
fun greet() {
    println("Hello $name")
}

10) What are some common libraries and frameworks used with Kotlin (beyond standard library)?
Android Jetpack (ViewModel, LiveData, Room)
Jetpack Compose
Kotlin Coroutines
Retrofit
Ktor
Firebase
Dagger / Hilt
Glide / Coil
JUnit / MockK
